Ongoing research and development efforts are focused on improving the cost-effectiveness and energy efficiency of carbon capture technologies.
One ongoing research and development effort to improve the cost-effectiveness and energy efficiency of carbon capture technologies is the development of a water-lean solvent that can absorb carbon dioxide before it reaches the atmosphere. This technology has been tested in the lab and at a pilot plant scale, and has been scaled up to a 12-megawatt demonstration facility in Norway. The solvent allows carbon to be captured at a cost of approximately $42 per ton, close to the Department of Energy's target of between $30 and $40 per ton.
To improve the cost-effectiveness and energy efficiency of carbon capture technologies, there is a need for stronger financial incentives, such as a carbon price, to encourage power plants to invest in higher capture percentages.
There are favourable policy settings in many countries that are boosting the number of projects under active investigation and development.
New, more efficient and lower-cost capture technologies across a range of applications are changing the outlook for one of the most significant cost components of the carbon capture and storage value chain.
There is considerable potential to reduce costs along the CCUS value chain, particularly as many applications are still in the early stages of commercialisation.
The development of economic stimulus packages in response to the Covid‑19‑related economic downturn presents a unique opportunity to boost investment in CCUS and support a least-cost pathway to net zero.
In addition to demonstrating our process at the largest scale so far, we embarked on a new partnership with the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory to develop even more advanced solvents.
CCUS can be retrofitted to power and industrial plants that may otherwise still be emitting 8 billion tonnes of CO2 in 2050 – around one-quarter of today’s annual energy-sector emissions.
